- Hey, YouTube.
Hey, Samuel.
- Hi there, how are you doing?
- Doing very well.
I'm super excited to be talking about Pydantic
and your plan and all these changes.
And I know there's a whole bunch of people
I've seen on Twitter and here on YouTube
that are gonna be excited.
So thanks for being here.
For those of you listening,
be sure to throw some comments and thoughts
into the live chat and we'll try to get those into the show.
Ready to kick this off?
- Absolutely.
- All right.
Samuel, welcome back to Talk by Pydantic.
to talk Python to me. It's great to be back. It was when was it? It was in the middle of it was
in COVID, wasn't it? I seem to remember. It was core COVID. Yes, it was just what was that about
15 months ago? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I was in my attic in the yeah I'm now in the office.
Exactly. Locked down in the house and and all those kinds of things. Yeah, for sure.
So yeah, it's great to have you back.
We talked about Pydantic back then.
Obviously, we're talking about Pydantic now as well.
I would say it's grown tremendously since then.
It was already quite popular then.
- Yeah, I think it's, I don't have right now
off the top of my head good metrics on, you know,
insofar as you can quantify the growth of these things.
I think it, yeah, it's grown a lot,
but I think the feeling for me is it's become
a lot more companies and people have started to rely on it,
and it's become a core tool that they expect to work
in the way you expect pytest or Django to work.
Not quite, perhaps, at those levels, but moving in that direction.
And yeah, I guess I'm probably jumping the gun,
but at the beginning of this year, I was thinking about it,
and I was obviously super proud of how many people were using Pydantic
and how useful it was being, but I wasn't quite so proud of its internals,
which is why I started thinking about
what it would look like to kind of start again,
'cause obviously V2 was an opportunity to break stuff,
not that we haven't broken things in minor releases
when we shouldn't have done,
but like to formally break things and do it right,
where it was obviously, I guess, wrong from the beginning.
- Sure, well, the original,
the goal, I'm sure, is not to go out and break things,
but sometimes in order to take years of learning
an experience and usage and turn that into the way you think it should be,
some things may have to break, right?
Yeah, I think that when I first released Pydantic, it wasn't...
I've subsequently built projects I thought were going to be really popular
and there's been, you know, varied in their success,
but I literally built Pydantic for me and put it on, you know,
put it on PyPy and then put it on Hacker News to see what would happen.
But because of that, I thought about...
there were some esoteric design decisions that were the stuff I wanted,
but on reflection, they're not right
for a popular library used by lots of people.
Strictness being, I guess, the most obvious example,
but a bunch of other stuff.
- Yeah, we'll talk about strictness.
We'll talk about a lot of these changes,
but why do you think it was popular?
- I think it came along at the right time.
I think it came along when type hints
were just getting popular in Python.
They had been around in some guise for like ever, right?
You could do something with them in 2.7,
but they were just beginning to become a thing.
mypy was coming out, but I suppose I was not the only person who was frustrated by
the idea that they didn't have teeth, that they were there.
But it seemed kind of weird, right?
If you came from a Rust or a C++ or a C background, types are everything.
And the idea that they were there but they meant nothing was a bit of an anathema to
me and I just started off with, "Can I make them work a bit?"
And that was five years ago and here we are.
- Yeah, I agree that coming along at the right time
was probably part of the magic.
I think there was just some libraries and some frameworks
who decided these types should have meaning, like you said.
There was a couple of web frameworks,
obviously most notably FastAPI,
but there were other ones as well
who were taking the ideas of,
here's some type definitions in Python
and what can we do with that?
Could we actually make that mean something
to help the developer experience?
- I think that's true, and I guess I got some stuff right
in doing documentation quite well, quite early on.
I know that it wasn't perfect,
but it did the job at the time.
FastAPI and Sebastian's,
Sebastian's amazing in lots of things,
but his capacity to write documentation
that is almost a story, that almost leads you,
is enjoyable to read in the way
that documentation normally isn't.
Obviously, being adopted by FastAPI,
like strapped rockets to Pydantic,
but I think the other thing that made
an enormous difference is that I came to Pydantic
as a developer, not a typing academic.
And I know there's a lot of debate about whether or not
the typing world of Python moves a bit too far
into the world of the theoretical,
but I always wanted, for me it was always obvious
that a string of 123 should be coerced to an int.
And there's a lot of people who will say that's not useful.
And then there's a million different ways
in which they use it and they don't even realize.
Because you think it's really obvious
when you have ID equals 123 in a URL
that that 123 is an integer.
But obviously when you're passing a URL,
there's no way to say that is actually definitely an int.
So some of the lax stuff, the coercion,
I think has been the thing that sets Pydantic apart
from some of the other libraries
that were perhaps more formally correct,
but I would argue less useful in lots of contexts.
- Well, I also think the more that you work on the web,
where what you're accepting is out of your control,
you want more help and you want more validation
and you want more guardrails.
People are posting JSON documents
of who knows what to you.
There's the query strings and the URL parameters
that are always strings,
no matter what they're supposed to be and stuff.
So yeah, I think Hydandic especially fit well
in the API side of things.
- I also think there's the risk of getting a bit
kind of like fuzzy and cod philosophy about this.
There's a value in remembering what it was like
to not be that good a developer
and making it easy to use for beginners.
And there's definitely a world of developers
whose primary interest it feels
is proving how much they know
rather than making it easy for people.
And Sebastian is even better at this than I am,
but I think Pylantic does a good job of it,
of being easy to use.
And if you're new to developing,
you and I know the difference between bytes and string,
and obviously we would laugh through our nose
at anyone who got them confused,
but the fact is that when you're new,
they look like two identical things,
and one's got a B at the beginning,
and the other one's got an F at the beginning,
and what does any of that mean, right?
- Yeah, just ignore that part, yeah.
- Right, and so the fact that you can pass bytes
to a string field saves people a lot of head scratching.
- Yeah, it certainly has taken on a life,
quite a life in the Python space
and many, many different frameworks and libraries
are depending upon it, which is great.
Some stats that you put in this article,
we're gonna talk, or this plan that we're gonna talk about,
there's 72,000 public repos that I'm guessing
are expressing some kind of dependency on.
- Yeah.
- Pydantic and then 10,000 get up stars.
Yeah, that's coming up on 11.
That's pretty amazing.
- And the download count,
I think it was 24,000 a month,
sorry, 24 million a month when I last looked from PyPy.
And that doesn't include distributions.
Pydantic is distributed with,
I think every major Linux distribution.
So downloads in those contexts won't be included in that.
So yeah, it's like it's being,
It's widely adopted and it seems to be getting more widely adopted as time goes on.
Yeah, for sure.
Just to back up what you're saying to an army captain out there,
it says, "Pidentik is very easy to onboard."
Yeah, it's...
Just because it does what you would expect it to,
what you would want it to do.
Yeah.
So, let's see.
One thing I wanted to sort of touch on a little bit
before we got into the plan officially
is let's just highlight some of the frameworks
that are
making core use of Pydantic.
Obviously we talked about FastAPI, right?
For people who don't know, maybe tell them real quick. What is FastAPI?
FastAPI is a
amazing web framework that allows you to, I think if you scroll down, I think that probably pictures will be better than words.
Yeah.
You use Pydantic and types generally to define what data people can pass to your endpoints.
primarily as per the name for developing APIs.
And yeah, it makes it super simple.
I think there's an example down somewhere a bit further down
on the home page.
Maybe there isn't.
Maybe it's on getting started.
But there we are.
Yeah, you see here, whether it be URL parameters like item ID
or query parameters or obviously the body,
they're all validated with Pydantic,
which cuts out enormous amount of the work
building APIs.
Absolutely.
And then there's a couple of things
interesting.
You have Pydantic models,
which are Python classes
with type, you know,
a field colon type.
So you express the type
information about it.
And then you can say this API
function just takes one of these
and it will automatically
pull that data in and validate it
using Pydantic through.
Like the body, but then
also you can express that
that is the response model
or the input model, and it'll use OpenAPI
to actually generate the documentation.
So there's all these different ways
in which FastAPI is made better.
- So the powerful thing about FastAPI
is that by defining a relatively small amount here,
we just defined it as like a three line function
to define our endpoint, we get JSON schema for the input.
So then we get docs built off of that.
And we get obviously docs on the return type
if we annotated it with what's returned.
So yeah, from, and obviously the value
and I can see from your tabs where you're gonna go next,
like you define something in one place
and you can then use it for your input
and for your return type and then in your database.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So yeah, here's the, this is the most well-known example
for using it on the API layer, the web layer,
but there's also some cool examples of databases
as you pointed out there, right?
- Yeah.
- Did this surprise you when you saw these?
You probably had the API stuff in mind,
but did the database surprise you?
- It did a bit.
I mean, I haven't looked at Beanie in lots of detail,
but yeah, it's amazing that these things are coming along
and being built and leveraging what Pydantic can do.
I'm not a big ORM fan myself.
I'm a bit old fashioned.
I like to write my SQL.
I like to write SQL, not MySQL.
So I haven't actually used them, I have to say,
but FastAPI I've used a lot
and I've found absolutely amazing,
but I can't talk about Beanie or SQL model
beyond having had a quick look.
- Yeah, you're like, "Oh, interesting.
"What are they doing with this thing I created?"
Yeah, so I just wanna give a quick sort of awareness,
Shout out to Beanie, which is an async ODM object
document mapper from MongoDB, like an RM,
but there's no R, so D for document, based on motor.
So it's pretty cool.
It takes the asynchronous driver from MongoDB
and then Pydantic, you just express your models,
your documents as Pydantic models,
which map really well because you can have hierarchies
of Pydantic classes and models,
which maps perfectly to document databases.
So yeah, this is actually what TalkBython
and Python Bytes websites are built on,
which has been really nice.
And then obviously, Sebastian Ramirez created SQL model,
which is the same idea, but for SQL, right?
It's built on top of SQLAlchemy,
but you actually define your classes as identic models,
and then that finds a way to sort of work with SQLAlchemy
to still do the same stuff that it traditionally has done.
So yeah, it's pretty neat.
- Yeah, I think there was one of the complaints people had
was that they were having to define their data twice.
They would have a Pydantic model
and then they would have a SQLAlchemy model.
And so, yeah, it's not very surprising in a way
that we found a way to combine them into one.
Again, I'm not an expert on the internals of SQL model,
but yeah, the two things look similar enough
that like at a first pass,
you would think it would make kind of sense
to, yeah, squish them together.
- Yeah, and one interesting thought about this
is if you're gonna work in SQL model
or you're gonna work in Beanie or something like that,
and you decide, no, I actually wanna switch
to a relational database,
or I wanna switch from a relational database
over to MongoDB or something like that,
if it's all expressed as Pydantic models,
like how close are you?
You know what I mean?
Like it's very little work to sort of make that transition.
So it's cool that Pydantic is this kind of like
abstraction layer. - And that's a cool project.
There's a cool project that I was discussing with Adrian,
I think it's Garcia yesterday, which is using
Pydantic models to define data coming in
from already Google Pub/Sub
and from AWS, SQS, and potentially from Redis.
So again, it's the same idea that like,
once you define your models in Python,
it wouldn't be that hard to switch from AWS to Google
or even to like a database type tool like Redis.
- Yeah, wow, amazing.
Teddy out in the audience says,
"We use data model code generator
to generate our Pydantic models from JSON schemas."
Are you familiar with that?
- Yeah, yeah, so obviously,
just as you can generate a JSON schema
from a Pydantic model,
there's a third-party tool that lets you go the other way
and generate Pydantic models.
It obviously won't do everything for you,
validators and stuff,
but it gives you the first start.
- Nice.
Let me throw one more out there
before we dive into the plan, which is where we're going.
How about JSON to Pydantic Converter?
Have you seen this website?
- I had, I did not know that existed until now,
but I guess it's using that same tool under the hood,
is it?
- We'll watch this.
- Maybe it's not.
- It may be, I'm not actually sure.
I haven't seen it mentioned it, but it doesn't really say.
So.
- I'd say not, 'cause it doesn't,
that's not JSON schema, right?
That's just.
- What you do is you give it an example.
- Oh, that's very cool.
you give it an example JSON document.
I'm till 27.
So you give it a JSON document and it will actually,
when I first heard about this,
well, Pydantic will already generate JSON.
Like, no, no, no, the other way,
you give it a JSON results and it will generate
the data model by looking at it.
And it actually, even if you have like hierarchical stuff,
it'll create multiple base model derived classes
and all sorts, this thing is,
this is pretty sweet right here, this thing.
- That's pretty powerful, kudos to whoever built it.
Yeah, I hadn't heard of it, but.
- Yeah, and I've thrown massively complicated
JSON documents at it.
It is just like, well, it's gonna take eight classes,
but here you go, and it just writes them all.
It's fantastic.
All right, well, with that, let's talk about the plan.
First of all, before we get into the plan,
I just wanna say, well done on this.
We covered this on the Python Bytes podcast
three or four weeks ago, something like that.
And the response was, "Oh my gosh,
this is incredibly detailed, incredibly well thought out."
I think somebody, audience commented like,
"There are companies that have been created
and founded with less thought about the future
and doing than that."
So yeah, nicely done.
- Thank you.
Yeah, I spent a lot of time,
quite a lot, a PyCon talking about this.
to people and talking about little bits of it,
there was a lot of it in my brain.
And Sebastian, who is kind enough to sponsor me,
but also obviously is maintaining FastAPI,
was kind of asking me what it was gonna do.
And I kept being like, "Oh, it'll do that thing,
"and it'll do this thing."
And then I got to the point of realizing,
and probably about 70% of issues on Pydantic's issue tracker
I reply with, "Don't worry, it'll work in V2."
And I realized I got to the point where I really owed
the community an answer to some of these questions.
In fact, the first bit of feedback I got from it was,
I'm dyslexic and I'm quite slow at reading
and those read time notes never make any sense to me.
So I just put 10 minutes in at the very beginning
and then forgot about it as I extended it and extended it.
And the first feedback was, great article,
but how the hell is anyone reading that in 10 minutes?
And so I pulled a new number out of thin air.
- I, so yeah, it's a 25 minutes reading time,
which I think is actually fairly accurate
depending on how thoughtful you think
about these various things.
So the plan is--
- Someone had, I've gotta have a shout out
to one joke on Twitter.
Someone was like, when it said 10 minutes,
they were like, 10 minutes to parse,
two days to validate, which I thought.
- Oh yes, well done.
Very, very pedantic like.
Okay, so why do we need this plan?
What's, why do we need to start?
- So I think, I mean, like stepping back a bit,
most projects, once they're mature and in widespread use,
people don't sit down and tear them to pieces.
They mostly stick with the same kind of warts
and people polish the edges, but there's not a from scratch
rebuild.
And often when there is from scratch rebuild,
it offends a lot of people because they
don't know what's happening.
And the cost of migrating is quite high,
and they're turned off.
But I thought there was enough wrong with the internals of Pydantic,
and there was enough opportunity to do stuff way better,
and there was enough reason to do that because there were enough people using it,
that it was worth me sitting down and spending six months,
but we've passed six months, building it right.
And like I say, there was one of the...
Not stats, but one of my observations was looking at...
So there was a Stack Overflow survey
of what technology people are using.
And FastAPI had, I don't know what percentage,
but like 6% market share, right?
And then below it, they were talking about clouds
and which clouds have what market share.
Now, if you assume the same number of people
are using web frameworks as are using clouds,
which is an approximation, but not a mad approximation,
then you would say that FastAPI and therefore Pydantic
have a bigger market share than Oracle and IBM combined.
in slightly different markets and obviously without the revenue to go with it.
But it makes you realize that getting this right
has a massive effect on lots of people.
And secondly, I don't have a clue how many times
Pydantic validates data a day between Netflix and Facebook
and Amazon and Microsoft and everyone else, but it's a high number.
And so the environmental impact of making Pydantic 10 times
faster and therefore consume 10 times less CO2 to do
a validation is, I suspect, not trivial.
It's virtually impossible to get an accurate number,
but something real.
That's a really interesting way to think of it with almost
having a responsibility to lessen the compute load.
And when you're running your own website
and it does a couple of users an hour or whatever,
Like who cares, right?
But when you're talking a million requests a second
or whatever it is across all the different people
using all the different frameworks across, right?
That actually is meaningful.
- That's not what I suspect.
And like, think about a web server,
assuming your database is doing all of the heavy lifting
that it should be doing.
What's the next biggest thing?
Well, there's TLS termination, that's expensive,
but again, that's done by some optimized C and Nginx
or probably outside your code completely
if you're using a platform provider.
What's the next biggest thing
that your code is doing CPU wise?
Well, it's data validation basically.
- Yeah, conversion, serialization, deserialization,
validation, and all that lives in the pedantic realm.
Also, I talked about two frameworks
and I know there are others like Pydastic
for Elasticsearch.
where the validation and the data exchange
is the database exchange as well, right?
That's, that could be very important for,
if you make this much faster,
I don't know the numbers for Beanie precisely,
but I know that a lot of those ORM ODMs,
if you go and query and get like 10,000 rows back,
the vast majority of that time is,
how do I construct and fill out 10,000 objects in memory?
- Yeah. - Right?
And if you make Pydantic faster
and Pydantic is that object,
well, there's a huge bonus right now.
- It's more than just,
and I think the other thing to say
is we've talked about web applications
and from FastAPI being the kind of most high profile user
of Pydantic, we talk about that a lot,
but a lot of its usage,
if you look at stuff that Explosion AI are doing,
it's in data science and AI,
and it's exactly that, it's like data sanitization
into and out of models or into and out of databases.
And there you are talking about really massive amounts of data.
>>Absolutely. All right, let's get into it.
So we talked about the plan.
How about the roadmap, the timeline, things like that?
>>So we're behind a bit, but we're not too far behind.
I released version 0.1 of Pydantic Core yesterday,
So that's, I'll come to what that means in a minute,
but that's the first step of the plan.
I'm about, I think I've either closed or merged 25 PRs today
trying to get through Pydantic and get version V1.10 out.
So I'm halfway, I'm not halfway through,
I'm some bit of the way through two to be precise.
- Right, so what you were talking about in the plan,
as you said, there's a bunch of open PRs,
a bunch of open issues.
Let's merge in as much of that as possible
to sort of capture it and then move forward
in this rewrite that we'll talk about.
- Right, yeah, exactly.
So get 1.10 out, which is the same basic code base
with a bunch more stuff added that I've,
because I had a job and was really busy earlier in the year,
I kind of dropped the ball on reviewing those PRs
and they kind of got out of control.
but get them dealt with and then get to a clean slate
and then make the big move from V1.10 to V2.
- Yeah, okay.
And we do talk about there being breaking changes.
We'll get into some specific details there,
but probably the most relevant to this entire rewrite
is this thing you're calling the Pydantic-Core.
Yeah? - Yeah.
So this started off as a kind of small experiment
with me saying, what would, a kind of thought experiment,
what would Pydantic look like
if it was implemented in Rust?
What would its internals look like
if they were implemented in Rust?
And that experiment effectively worked,
and sure enough, Pydantic Core is written in Rust
and does all of the core data validation,
and it will do a lot of the serialization.
I haven't built that yet,
that I intend to build into Rust.
So there's an awful lot that will stay in Python,
but yeah, Pydantic Core is written in Rust
and uses the amazing Py03 library to bindings
to write Rust code that's callable from Python.
- Yeah.
Maybe tell people about Py03 real quick,
because this is how you write the code in Rust,
but then expose it to the rest of the Python aspects
of Python, right?
- Yeah, Py03, I'm not a good C developer
and I'm gonna use the wrong terminology
and be shouted at, but like,
it takes the Python ABI for C,
so how you would write C codes to be used from Python,
and effectively makes that available in Rust.
Rust has great interop with C,
and so, yeah, it basically takes all those types
and exposes them all in a type-safe way
that you can then consume.
So if we stop here and we look at like,
Summers, a string, right?
Where Py03 is taking care of all the hard work
of you passing two ints from Python into this function,
converting them to uSize,
then the logic inside is pure Rust,
it's adding two uSizes
converting the result to a string,
and then again, Py03 is taking care of returning it,
and in particular, using this PyResult result type in Rust,
without going too far down the rabbit hole
of how Rust works, Rust has an amazing model
for how to deal with errors,
that basically stops you from ever ignoring an exception,
or what they call an error,
and that's these results, which are basically,
they would call it an enum, but from Python world,
think of it like a union, which is either okay,
it went well or error, it was an error.
And so you have to return an okay,
or you have to return an error.
And when you consume that in Rust,
you have to deal with the error case.
It won't let you ignore it.
But that maps really nicely into Python exceptions.
So here we're returning okay, so we'll get a result.
But if we used py error and return that,
then you would get an exception
when you call the function.
- Interesting.
So the powerful thing about Rust,
but obviously it's faster, everyone knows that,
and it does mean the Pydantic core is much faster
than Pydantic, and Pydantic 2 will be much faster
than Pydantic 1.
I think it's probably quite rare to see a library
in a version update get significantly faster,
let alone like 10 to 50 times faster as Pydantic 2 will be.
So that's been achieved, but there are other advantages
that you get which are perhaps less obvious.
One of them is recursion without a performance penalty
that means that Pydantic core data validation
is truly recursive all the way down
and allows you to build effectively
any crazy combination of different validators
into each other.
Because validators are this basically pile of,
think of them as classes in Python,
they're not classes in Rust,
but that call each other recursively all the way down.
And you can, one of the other advantages is like tiny functions, which allow you to split
code up and make it easier to edit one thing without breaking other things.
Because in Python, it's not entirely obvious to people coming from languages like C, C
sharp, Rust and so on that just calling a function itself is pretty expensive, relatively
speaking in Python.
Yeah, I'm on the wing of people who would say
if you're worrying about the overhead of calling a function,
you're probably not writing the right language most of the time.
Yes, it's a big number, but it's a tiny number in most contexts.
But I think there's definitely a world in which end users,
people building web apps in Python,
definitely for companies should and will be using Python.
But the libraries that underpin that, that they use,
There's big value.
Value is a complex term in open source in itself,
but let's use the word value and ignore what it might mean.
In implementing those libraries, there's the second step down.
So the Pydantic, the HTTP framework,
in Rust, or in... I think in Rust, basically,
because those are the... well, there are three libraries that have real bindings for Python.
Python, C, I don't want to be writing lots of C
and I don't think many people do.
Well, I'll say that.
Rust obviously, and then there's C++ and Boost.
And I think the developers of Py03 came from using Boost
and they basically built Py03 to be better.
I've used Boost a bit,
but I found Py03 to be really impressive.
- Yeah.
I think your comment about,
should you be worrying about those loops is super relevant.
There's certain libraries where Pynantic
is certainly among them.
It's used so much that these little tiny portions,
probably just a very small slice of the code
that is applicable is actually a pretty significant hit
in terms of overall performance.
You know, you think like SQLAlchemy
and like the serialization, deserialization bit, right?
That's a small part of the library,
but that's something that just is omnipresent, right?
And this internal validation and stuff
that you're thinking about doing in PyO3
or in Rust, combine it with PyO3,
it makes a big difference even if it's only a small,
relatively small portion of the part
that people perceive it to be.
- Exactly, and coming back to my environmental point,
the environment doesn't care if you take a flight
or I take a flight or I miss a flight,
But obviously, the environment does
care if we can reduce the number of flights taken worldwide
by 10%.
And because of Pydantic's widespread use,
that's why I'm saying getting Pydantic to be 10% faster,
you probably won't notice.
But overall, we will hopefully make computation in the cloud
a tiny bit faster.
>>Absolutely.
Question from the audience.
Magnus says, will a user be able to write data validators
in Rust for Pydantic 2?
- That is a difficult and complex question.
There is an open issue on Pydantic Core's issue tracker
about it, and I have proposed a way
that it might be possible.
The story of shared libraries, DLLs, in Rust
is not quite as pretty as it could be,
and I really don't want to build, basically,
another way of sharing dependencies beyond PyPI
where you're like, okay, you need to install
Pydantic from PyPI, then you need to install
this other package, perhaps from PyPI,
and then you need to use this other code to link the DLL
so that we can do a, you know,
dynamically link those libraries.
That sounds like an enormous maintenance overhead
for me and for people doing it
because people find it hard enough to share code
and use code from PyPI.
- Yeah, then how do you deploy that
and how do you get it compiled?
- Right, so very briefly, my theory for an answer is,
actually, I'm not gonna go down that rabbit hole right now,
but there's an issue that I think explains it
and I'm happy to talk about it there.
- Sure, if you don't add it now,
you don't have to live with the consequences
of choosing that.
- That's the other thing, right?
That like someone comes along and has a really bright idea
and in 10 years time, I'm still answering questions
about how to make it work.
- Yeah, exactly, okay.
You already mentioned the performance,
But just working our way through the plan here,
the next step is to say,
hey, the benchmarks indicate this is four to 50 times faster
and in general, 17x is kind of what you're guessing
for something reasonable.
- And not guessing, as in just the benchmarks
on Pydantic core that are run on every commit,
a lot of them have alternate equivalents in Pydantic 1.9,
And so that's the speed up that we're seeing.
There are a few more optimizations I can make.
There are a few, it'll get a tiny bit slower,
I guess, when it's wrapped in Pydantic,
in Python, but a tiny amount.
So yeah, I think those are realistic numbers.
- Yeah, that's a huge difference.
Now you say when validating a model,
how does that performance compare
to creating a Pydantic class instance?
you know, how much, how much faster does like using
that in Python get versus.
- 17 times faster doing the validation.
You should get your model back.
So that is going from a Python object,
a Python dict let's say of your input data
to a instantiated class instance, instance of your model.
- Right, fantastic.
Okay, that is really, really awesome.
Next up is strict mode.
One of the things I really like about Pydantic is how it will take data that is,
could be the right thing, but it's not actually the right thing.
Like you said, the string 1, 2, 3, but you really want an integer,
the actual number 1, 2, 3.
And it just says, you know, this is what we would do if I had to do it myself.
I would parse the string and convert it over and so on.
And that just happens.
but some people don't want this clever behavior, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
And I think that there are legitimate cases for that.
I think there are some people who are wanting it
whose cases I don't think are entirely legitimate,
but like, yeah, I totally get why in some contexts
it's valuable.
And so, yeah, so it's built in.
Yeah, you have that switch from the word go.
One of the really cool things that this solves
kind of, not by mistake, but as a side effect,
is validating unions.
We basically run through every member of the union
in strict mode first, and try and validate in strict mode,
and then validate in lax mode.
And therefore, for example, if you had a union of int
and string, and then you passed it the string 1, 2, 3,
it wouldn't get converted to int,
as it would do in historically in Pydantic.
Pydantic now has smart union, but like it's not perfect,
but this solves some edge cases like that
and some much more confusing ones than that.
- Nice, related to that is I would say
is this conversion table that you're putting out, right?
What's the story here?
- So there's two things.
There's this like, I kind of called it
cod philosophy the other day,
like this like rule for when you would convert something
when you wouldn't. And actually it's come out to be really useful in us thinking about when we
shouldn't convert things, because to take an example we have been in Pynantic v1, you can
coerce a set to a list and that mostly seems to make sense and it's something that you might want
to do in lots of contexts, but actually if you go up a bit the single and intuitive means we can't
convert a set to a list because you don't always get the same output when you convert a set to a
because the order of things can change.
And so using this rule has been helpful
in trying to be more consistent about what we convert.
But I'm the first to put my hand up and say,
this rule is not perfect,
there are always going to have to be exceptions to it.
And at the bottom of this blog post,
but then properly on the docs completed,
will be a full on table of everything
and what gets converted and what doesn't in Lax mode.
So you can look it up rather than having to guess.
Before we move off strict mode,
Klutz just has some kind things to say about PyTanix
as it's one of the most useful packages ever, congrats.
- That's really good, sorry.
- But Magnus,
Magnus asks, is strict mode a global or a per model setting
or is it a usage when you actually do the parsing?
Where do you set this?
- It's actually more powerful than that.
It is either on a field
or on an entire model, and you can set it at validation time.
So you can configure it in config
and configure it on a particular field,
and then you can override it
when you're effectively calling the validator.
- I see, maybe there's some situation
where you're loading old bad data
or something you wanna say, go ahead and do this,
but in the future, we're not accepting it,
something like that.
- Right, and actually, one of the reasons I built that
was to use it in the union,
because we go through the validators the first time
at validation time, insisting on strict mode.
But yeah, one of the other cases
which will come up somewhere down here
is we now have a isInstance
or a like pseudo isInstance method,
which confirms whether data matches our model.
And there we automatically use strict mode
'cause for me, it's kind of obvious
that if you're doing isInstance,
you want that to be strict.
- Yeah.
All right, moving on to the next part of the plan
is built-in JSON support.
- Yes, so this is-
- What are we talking about here?
- So we're talking about parsing JSON in Rust
and parsing that JSON object straight in,
within, internally within the library to the validator
to then do the validation.
One of the big advantages that has
is it solves the strict mode problem.
So if you looked above,
let's say we have the string of a date,
let's say an ISO 8601 date of year, month, day.
In JSON, it's obvious that that should be validated
as a date, but if you pass that in from a Python object,
it's not valid in strict mode, right?
That's not, that doesn't look anything like a date.
The problem if we had strict mode
without the built-in JSON validation is
you can't pass JSON with a date in it.
- There's no scenario where directly going from JSON works
Because JSON, for odd reasons, has no concept.
- It doesn't have date, but it also doesn't have set
or bytes or loads of stuff that you want to use in Python.
So one of the things that built-in JSON support gives us,
as well as obviously a performance premium,
is that we can be sensible and say
that ISO-8601 date is a valid date in strict mode
if it's coming from JSON, but not from Python.
- Okay, yeah, and also just makes it faster, right?
Because probably parsing JSON and Rust is pretty quick.
- It's really, it's fast,
but also we don't have to create a Python dict
and a Python list and all those Python types.
Creating Python strings has like some significant overhead
compared to creating a string in Rust.
And in future, once I've got V2 out,
I intend to build a custom JSON parser,
which is even faster and will give us line numbers in errors,
which would be really nice,
'cause we don't have that now and we can't do that in V2
because src/json, which I'm using,
doesn't provide line numbers,
but I hope in V2.1 or something,
we will be able to add that.
- Yeah, amazing.
Really quick on the strict stuff as well.
Manoj asks, "What about strict int as a type?
Is it gonna be still around?"
- That can stay around 'cause that will just be,
That'll be effectively,
so it's probably worth at this stage for people,
if you could just go to Pydantic Cores repo
and we'll have a really brief look at what it looks like.
Yeah, and then just in the readme, you'll see a example.
So you see here, right?
We up a bit.
You don't need to go into all the details of it,
So the way that we define the model in Pydantic core
is with this kind of micro schema, which
is defining, in this case, a type dict
with a bunch of fields in it.
And here, on a particular field, we could say strict true.
So let's say on the int field, we could say strict true.
And that field will be strict, while the rest isn't.
So obviously, what strict int the Pydantic type will do,
when it becomes a schema, it will set strict to true
on that particular field.
- Got it.
So effectively is a synonym for the more general way
to say use strict mode, but only on this field, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
It's just a marker effectively sets strict on this field.
So in Pydantic, you can say I have, say an age,
which is an int,
and you can set it to a default value like zero,
or you could say it's optional, set it to none,
but you can also set it to a field, right?
where you have additional information.
Is that how you set strict mode?
Do you set it to a field and say strict mode equals true
or something like that more generally?
- It's not built yet, so it's up for debate.
But yeah, effectively strict will be a setting on field
and obviously on config as well.
And there will be these types
which basically contain some extra information
like strict int will just like set that strict to true
for that field. - Right, exactly.
And for people who are not aware,
config is an inner class of the Pydantic model
that has a bunch of settings you can set, right?
- Yeah, and people do some unholy stuff
of like modifying the base version of config
and therefore doing global stuff, which I've never done.
People seem to make it work.
I don't know if it'll work in V2.
I don't promise it will.
- Yeah, absolutely.
One of the things that's interesting
with this Pydantic core is now
this is a dependency of Pydantic, right?
- Yeah.
- And people could use it directly if they wanted, right?
Like validating without a model,
you don't have to define a class or any of those things.
100%, you don't have to define the class.
If we look in the example we were using there,
we didn't have a class,
we were just validating to a type dict,
so we would get back a dict,
which obviously means we have full support
for typing's type dict type.
It's also a little bit faster than creating a model
'cause we don't have to create the class instance,
we just create the dict that goes inside it.
Yeah, people could use it without.
The only concern, obviously, is whether or not,
like, obviously it's now compiled,
and you have to be able to run that Rust code
to be able to use Pydantic.
With the v0.1 release of Pydantic Core yesterday,
we have, I think, off the top of my head,
56 different binaries that we released
for different environments.
The team of the guys at Py03 and at Maturin,
which is their way of building,
have been super helpful,
and we'll continue to support, so it doesn't worry me.
We already have the full Pydantic core set of unit tests
running in the browser via WebAssembly.
So obviously Python moving into the browser
with WebAssembly is like the big new thing.
I'm really excited about it.
I wanted Pydantic core to work.
And so Hud, who's one of the Pyodide maintainers,
I met at PyCon, he's been super helpful
actually with Pydantic core in general,
but particularly with getting it to work.
At the risk of running a live demo,
if you just go back to Pydantic Core,
I know it's slightly changing subject,
but I have to show you this because it makes me really excited.
We go up and you go into Wasm Preview,
which is one of the directories.
>> Yeah, Wasm Preview.
>> Then hit the index?
>> No, if you click here, which just basically renders that index file.
I hope it works.
>> It'll work.
>> It's got to work.
It's got to work.
This is it downloading the binary,
downloading all the unit tests, extracting them in Python,
and running the full test suite in the browser.
- Let me try it one more time.
Do it a second time.
Yeah, so what we're seeing, if you click on this link,
which I'll put in the show notes,
is it downloads the CPython runtime and WebAssembly
based on Pyodide, I'm guessing.
- Yep.
And then it downloads the archive zip,
sends that to Python.
Obviously we're running full CPython in the browser,
so we can use the zip package to extract the zip,
extract that into the virtual file system
that Inscription gives us.
Then we install the WASM32 wheel.
We basically do pip install, well, micro pip,
which is the way of installing stuff.
and then we just call pytest and off it goes
and it runs the tests.
- Yeah, see the test come by standard colorized pytest output
1,465 tests pass in five seconds.
Pretty fantastic.
- So it is a bit slower this than full CPython,
but I'm still like really stoked for what this is gonna mean
to the future of Python and particularly to stuff
like the context where you might use Pydantic
of data processing and stuff.
I don't think Python is gonna replace React,
and I think it's a bit daft of people to suggest it will,
'cause that's just gonna lead to disappointment,
but in context like this, it's gonna be super valuable.
One of the things I'm really looking forward to
is Pydantic 2's documentation.
Every single example is gonna be executable.
So you can edit it and you can press run
right inside the browser, which I think should help a lot.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Have you been tracking PyScript?
Yeah, I have been tracking PyScript.
It's obviously, it's very cool.
It's wrapping Pyodide,
which is where all the genius work is going on.
I'm using Pyodide directly,
and I think I can continue to do that.
But yeah, it's providing a bit of a,
like, yeah, a super helpful wrapper
for those who find, yeah, need a bit more help,
and it's simple as a script tag.
- Yeah, okay.
Let's see.
- Yeah, question from David out in the audience asks,
with at least two year projects switching to Rust,
PyDandic and watch files,
do you see it as a general trend in the Python ecosystem?
You know, in things like PyScript, which I just pulled up.
- I have a third one actually, rtoml,
which is a wrapper around the Rust toml library,
which is a bit less necessary now
when there is better toml support in Python,
but a couple of years ago
when the main toml package was not working for me,
I wrapped that.
Yes, I do.
I was saying earlier that I think lots of the low-level tools
should be written in Rust.
There is a massive space for someone to go out and build
a raging fast ASGI framework in Rust,
and obviously use a Rust web framework
and just provide ASGI interface.
I'm looking forward to someone doing that
to replace the lots of uVehicle.
Not that-- uVehicle is great.
It uses watch files, in fact, so not to criticize them,
but yeah, there are a bunch of low-level stuff
where performance matters, which totally,
and I think should and will end up being more in Rust.
- So you're suggesting something like
what you have for Flask, but everything is Rust,
except for just your view methods happen to be Python,
and click that together with Py03 or something like that.
- That's the ultimate place to go to.
I think that the place to start would be,
so we have WSGI, which many of you will have heard of,
which Flask and Django run on.
We have ASGI, which is the async equivalent,
which is basically, it's great,
because it means that to build a web framework,
you don't have to deal with HTTP,
you deal with a dict, which has basically got fields
and body and stuff like that, right?
And some function to get the rest of the body
in the async case.
And that's what we have now,
and we have like Starlette and uVehicle,
which are both built by Encode and are both great,
but they have a separation by using this consistent
protocol in between.
And that allows really cool innovation on both sides.
My suggestion is we don't have to get rid of the Starlet
or the FastAPI or that level,
but we could do lots of the low-level HTTP parsing
yeah, in Rust.
Before I get shouted down,
I'm sure that uveicorn and other such libraries
are in turn using some optimized C
for passing some of the HTTP requests.
So I don't have a number for the speed up, but.
- Right.
Okay, but yeah, that's a very interesting idea.
One thing I did wanna sort of touch on here is you have,
you talk about how there's not going to be
a pure Python implementation of the Pydantic core
because it's already this complex specialized thing in Rust
and why do it again in Python,
just so there might be some edge case of where it'll run.
Talk about maybe the platforms really quick
that's supported for,
the WebAssembly one we just spoke about, which is fantastic.
And I think that's gonna open up a lot of possibilities
the more stuff we have in WebAssembly,
but there shouldn't be a big problem with this, right?
That it's-- - There shouldn't.
I think with what we have there,
we've covered the 99%,
we're probably into the 99.9% of platforms covered
where people actually want to use this.
The only place where I know that there's a slight challenge
is on Raspberry Pi, where the normal install of Raspberry
and/or whatever it's called uses their own wheelhouse
effectively for installing wheels, which doesn't yet
support build of Rust.
I'm sure it will one day, and you can just tell it to use
PyPI, and it will work.
Again, this is the kind of thing where having built watch files
and distributed that, I've worked
through a lot of these problems,
and I'm pretty confident we're not gonna find
some really important framework,
sorry, really important environment
where it's just not gonna work.
And again, as more packages adopt Rust,
we'll smooth out those problems,
we'll learn from them,
and we'll be able to fix the edge cases.
- Yeah.
One benefit of that is previously,
Pydantic itself had some Cython and other things
where it needed to be faster,
but because now it can just use the PyDandic core,
what's left over is pure Python, right?
- Right, and one of the big problem,
well, there were two problems with that.
It made the development process a bit slow
because we basically took vanilla Python,
we compiled it with Cython,
and we got a kind of 50% speed up,
and we have to do some slightly weird things.
So occasionally you have to return union of just string
to prevent Cython from casting that string
to a native string and losing substrings, stuff like that.
Some weird edge cases that bite people occasionally.
But the biggest problem is that that means
that the Pydantic binaries are massive
because the Cython compiled versions
of Python code get really big.
And obviously moving the performance critical bit
into Pydantic core gets rid of that concern
and Pydantic itself becomes a pure Python package,
easier to hack on, CI will run faster,
the whole process should be sped up
and it'll be much smaller.
- Yeah, it'd be more approachable, right?
People, they wanna contribute to it and so on.
One thing that I did wanna ask,
well, let's see, losing track of my thought here
on this one, but no, I know, I know.
I had something I wanted to ask you
about the binary version here.
Oh well, we'll move on,
'cause I can't remember what I was gonna ask you.
But let's give, I jumped around,
'cause I did wanna talk about this compiled stuff,
You'll just get that as a wheel.
Almost everybody, they won't really know or care.
They just pip install it, it doesn't matter that it's Rust,
it just downloads as a binary.
Exactly. Same as loads of packages you use now.
NumPy and whatever.
They're all compiled.
If there is no wheel available,
then pip will do its very best to try and compile that for you.
In the case of Pydantic Core,
if you were in some crazy environment
where we didn't have a binary, you need Rust installed,
and then pip will take care of compiling it for you.
But like I said, that's going to be super rare.
And realistically, if you have that problem,
come and create an issue and we'll add the binary for you.
Sure. Okay.
Picking up back on the plan here,
you have required versus nullable changes?
We missed out one of the really cool things above.
I don't know if I saw it, if we're moving order,
which is the removing of the necessity for a model.
- Right. - So as we saw earlier
in the Pydantic Core example, we can validate.
So in Pydantic 1, everything was in the end
a Pydantic model.
So we looked earlier at FastAPI passing parameters.
In the background, FastAPI is creating a model,
doing the validation against that,
then extracting stuff from the model
and passing it to the function or whatever else.
Similarly, if you wanted to parse a type dict,
you basically, somewhere in the background,
as a model, we validate against that model,
then we take the dict from that model
and pass it back to the user.
That had some really confusing and annoying edge cases,
but obviously the main thing was it did have
a performance impact.
Now there is no fundamental kind of base type
in Pylantic core.
You can validate an int or a string
or a union of different stuff or a model
or a data class or a type dict,
and you just create your schema and off you go.
Fantastic. So basically, there's this low-level fast engine
that will just validate all sorts of things
if you want to use it directly, right?
Yeah. And one thing important to add just while we're on that
is there is stuff that's not going to be in Pydantic Core.
I don't think we'll add the URL type, for example.
There'll be some custom types that we don't add.
And obviously, if you want to implement your own types,
then the way that we get around that is that Pydantic Core
has basically a function validator,
which is basically call a function,
either having done some validation before or after,
and return the result.
So that's how we're going to provide a way
to build validators without writing Rust.
- Right, fantastic.
All right, required versus nullable?
- Yeah, probably a hangover from, again,
me building Palantik on my own for what I needed,
and also from, it kind of predated data classes,
at least in some of the work.
And so the real problem for me was the word optional,
and the idea that you had a field that was required,
but was literally called optional.
Obviously, Pydantic's not the only library
that has that problem.
And the real solution is the pipe operator,
which is the new way of doing unions,
none, involves not using the word optional.
You can obviously also get around it
by using union of string int,
But the point is that if you just have a field
that is optional int, it is required but can be none.
And that's really just to match data classes
and other contexts.
- Yeah, the new way to express optional
for like string pipe none versus optional string.
Yeah, that kind of set you free
to think about this differently.
- Yeah, also, I mean, I literally asked Guido
about it at PyCon and he was like,
he didn't say, yes, we made a mistake.
He said, that's fixed by having pipe none,
which is a roundabout way of saying
we kind of made a mistake back then,
but you know, typing has come a massively long way
since someone settled on the word optional.
So I get it, but it has been a source of confusion
that's now being cleared up.
- Yeah, for sure.
And there's other things that have been changed as well.
Right, used to have to say from typing import capital L list,
you return a lowercase list, but it'd be a capital L list.
And now it's like, you know what?
Lowercase list works too.
Right, you don't have to go and create these.
- Now we just have the weird side case of any,
where there isn't any function, but you can't use it,
but we won't go down that line.
- Yeah, for sure.
Wanna talk about validated functions?
- Yeah, I touched on them just now.
And like I said, we have the idea of before.
So we do a validation before,
and then we pass the result of that validation to a function.
We have validate afterwards.
And plain, which doesn't do any validation,
just calls the function.
The most exciting thing, probably one
of the things I'm most stoked for in Pydantic V2,
is these wrap validators.
So you will have read about middleware in Django
or any web framework.
We have this idea of an onion where we call a function, which
takes a handler to call the next function.
We have the same thing here in Pydantic V2,
where we have these, I've called them wrap validators.
They take a handler to a function and then they call that.
The power here is obviously we can do some logic
before the validator, we can do some logic after,
we can catch errors, we can return a default value.
It gives us loads of flexibility to do more powerful stuff.
- Yeah, that's very neat.
Yeah, you basically can do whatever you want
and decide to delegate down to the chain of handlers
if you want, or skip it, right?
You say, this looks good to me,
we're just gonna return a value here.
- In particular with Pylantic one,
there was no way to skip, yeah,
to skip validation if you had a validator.
So, which obviously caused a slowdown
if let's say you had date time now,
you still had to call the validator,
which sure enough got a date time and was happy,
but you had to go through that logic.
Whereas here, we know it's a date time
'cause we've written that code.
There is the potential for people to make mistakes
and not call the handler.
If they wanted to return the raw value,
then we can't stop them, but that's Python.
There aren't always guardrails.
- Right, yeah.
Some of the power is in the flexibility, right?
But that lets you do bad things as well.
- Yeah. - You also have this,
yeah, go ahead.
- Sorry to interrupt.
We could theoretically do some crazy thing
where we checked if the handler was called
and raised an error or a warning,
but I think at this point we let people
make their own mistakes if they insist.
- Well, and you also would pay a performance price
for all the places where it's used correctly.
- Yeah.
- Trying to do that kind of stuff, right?
All right, more powerful aliases.
- Yeah, this is a feature that I saw.
- Tell us what aliases are and then,
yeah, then what's the use here?
- Aliases are the idea that we have a name
for what we want to call a variable in our code,
but we know that in the real world
where the data is coming from, say on the front end,
it's got a different name.
Often it's CamelCase on the front end
'cause it's JavaScript and we wanna use
SnakeCase in Python, but also,
we're using some API and it has to be called something
when the data's coming in.
And so we had that in Pydantic v1,
the idea that you could have a field
that was called something else externally.
But this is actually a feature I saw in
the Rust third library,
which is the main validation library,
this idea of flatten.
So basically take a value,
not just from the top level decks,
but from deep down in some object,
we pass it and use that for the field.
And so again, this is one of the things.
- I see this kind of stuff.
Yeah, sorry.
I see this stuff all the time
where you will get some huge response from an API,
but you're like,
I just really want this little part here.
And so what you end up having to do is say,
okay, capture that result of the dictionary,
then navigate down to the three levels
and get the sub object,
and then pass that to Pydantic.
And here you could just say, the alias is,
sort of traverse that down and start from there, right?
- Exactly, and we get nice advances,
just like if that thing's not there,
we don't get an error because the get,
none has no get method or whatever it might be.
Pydantic will take care of just saying that feels missing
if let's say baz was a string.
So therefore we couldn't get baz, the second element.
you know, quarks, whatever that is.
- Yeah, so in the case you have here,
you say the alias is a list and the list is baz
and then two and quarks,
these are things that are appearing in this JSON document,
the dictionary.
- Yeah, go ahead.
- It's effectively some location,
but what you'll notice again,
is there's actually another outer list
because we can have more than one of these.
We can have it as deep as we like,
sorry, as many different aliases to try as you want.
- Right, yeah, so this actually traverses down,
and the two means go to the third item
'cause it's zero-based in the list
and then look for that element.
That's pretty powerful.
- Yeah, and again, this is the kind of thing
that we can do because Pylantic calls in Rust
and the overhead of having aliases
of multiple different types is basically absolutely minimal
'cause in Rust, it's a single enum lookup,
And if we have a simple alias of a string,
we don't need to worry about any of that crazy logic
to recurse down.
We just take the top element out of the top level dictionary
and move on.
- Right on.
Jonas asks, "Would this solve
when my app gets Pascal case?
I wanna work with snake case
and then return a camel case."
Is there some way to express that kind of stuff
with aliases?
- This does not, but we had,
there was a pull request for Pylantic two,
for Pylantic one, where we had load alias and dump alias.
So a different alias when we were exporting.
And I do intend to support that.
So this particular feature is kind of related
but won't solve it on its own.
But yeah, I do intend to allow two different aliases.
- Okay, speaking of loading and getting back out,
improvements to dumping serialization and export.
- Yeah, there's a bunch of stuff here
that people have wanted for a long time,
in particular being able to create
a JSON compliant dictionary,
but also people wanting to do their own customization.
Again, my hope is that because that dumping logic
will be implemented in Rust,
we can get, I'm gonna call it kind of zero cost
extra features, because in the end,
it's like, should be just an enum lookup
to do the complex stuff.
And if we're not doing the complex stuff,
we go the optimized path.
Yeah, what we've realized is there's a whole bunch
of different things that people might want.
They might want the raw data, including sub-models.
They might want what Dix does now,
which is recursively convert models into dictionaries,
but otherwise keep stuff unchanged.
They might want a JSON-compliant dict, as I was saying,
or they might want full serialization to JSON.
And obviously, that last one in particular,
we want to be quite well optimized.
Well, we want them all to be, but yeah.
- The last one's the most important, yeah.
Yeah, we want to be able to provide someone
complete flexibility without it harming performance
in the case where they're not using that.
And that's what I think Pylantic Core has allowed already
on validation and I hope will allow on serialization.
- Nice.
All right, we're getting a little short on time.
So let's maybe,
let's, why don't you pick out some of the remaining stuff
that you wanna focus on?
I think maybe the most important
is a model namespace cleanup.
What do you think?
I think context, I was just going to mention here,
that's going to be another amazingly powerful escape
hatch for some of the things people want to do.
Obviously, the main use of it is for allowing validation
against some dynamic data.
But you can also update that thing.
It's just a Python object.
So if you wanted some case--
we were talking about wrap validators earlier,
where you've got errors and you want to raise a warning,
you could append to context the warnings.
So that is another super powerful escape
without harming performance for everyone else.
How it's gonna work with FastAPI,
where the model, where you do the validation
before calling user code, I don't know yet,
but I'm sure Sebastian will find it.
- Yeah, how do you provide that data
that is the context, right?
- You have another dependency, I guess,
in FastAPI lingo that generates your context
for that particular call.
- Yeah, I was thinking some of the dependency injection
which is not very popular in Python in general,
but that might be the way you might register.
Here's how to get the context
for these types of models or something.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I mean, Sebastian will decide,
but that's what came to mind when I thought about it.
Yeah, for sure.
One quick question just on usage here.
I see that you're saying user
and then model validate JSON with this data.
And you could also just say user star star data.
I know you're doing this different here,
so you can pass the context,
but what would you say is the best way
to create these objects on that kind of data?
- Model validate JSON is gonna be there
and it's gonna be named that or something close to that.
And the point is that's taking a string of JSON
or in this case, bytes of JSON and validating it directly.
We talked about that earlier on.
So that's not the same as user star star
- Right, right, right. - data 'cause it's bytes.
There's also model validate Python,
which is effectively the same as model star star data,
except that because obviously we basically don't trust
anything you pass to it, that's all external data,
you can't pass context that way.
- Okay, yeah, exactly.
All right.
- Which I think comes onto your question
about the cleanup of the namespace.
- It does, yeah.
So there are some breaking changes
and there's a decent number about sort of renaming
some of these model methods and stuff, right?
Yeah, I'm not too worried about these because we're going to leave
the old functions there with a depreciation warning on all of them.
So that will be quite easy. The stuff that's going to be really hard
in terms of breaking changes is where, for example,
I've talked earlier about sets no longer being coercible to a list.
There's no way to give a warning about that, really,
without absolutely peppering Pydantic Core
with warning logic that would be horrific.
So there are going to be the things that are going to be most difficult for people are going to be like silent breaking changes.
I'm not particularly worried about functions that give you a warning when you call them and say use the new name.
It's going to be the silent stuff, or the fundamental changes in behavior that are going to be hard.
But again, I, there's no way to make Pylantic better without doing that.
Right.
Fair.
Okay, let's see.
I think it's worth pointing out the error descriptions
now have a documentation link.
That's kind of interesting.
- Yeah, I think that's gonna be super powerful for people.
I don't know anyone who's ever used a Cargo and Clippy,
which are the Rust tools for broadly speaking,
linting and compiling.
Whenever you get an error,
there's a link basically to give you more information.
And obviously a lot of these links
will be being shown to developers through APIs
and we can't provide all the information we might like
in a one-sentence message.
And so we're going to have a bit of Pydantic's docs dedicated
to information on every single warning,
every single error message, and what can happen.
It leads to another interesting question about Pydantic 2
and what we do with the documentation
and the licensing of it.
So Pydantic is definitely going to stay MIT-licensed.
Might be dual-licensed Apache 2, if someone can tell me
why that's necessary.
but it's going to stay permissively licensed.
But I'm kind of becoming aware that the documentation, which
is valuable and will get better and more valuable,
is currently MIT licensed.
And some company could take it all
and bang it on their domain totally legally.
So I might change the documentation license
to something a bit more restrictive.
To say, for example, you can't take all of these error
message documentation and just put them on your own domain,
or at least we have some way of making that possible
without allowing people to commercialize that.
Mostly because it would get really confusing
if there was Pydantic's documentation is up to date
and Fubar company who published the whole same thing
but leave it out of date and they both come up on GOOP.
- Yeah.
It's interesting to think about having this mixed model
in your repo 'cause obviously you want Pydantic,
the library to be wide open for people
But then there's this supporting stuff
that you might want to treat differently.
- Yeah, and I know that the Linux distributions
are gonna be super spiky if any of that stuff
that's not MIT licensed got distributed, right?
Because their package managers have to have stuff
that's correctly licensed.
I mean, obviously they allow stuff that's like GPL
or something, but I'm thinking about something,
probably GPL doesn't stop you publishing documentation.
So yeah, it's an open question.
I don't wanna have a separate repo for documentation
'cause it'll make creating a PR that much higher friction,
but I think I need to talk to an IP lawyer
before I say anything authoritative on this
is what I guess I'm getting to.
- Yeah, I'm feeling entirely unqualified
to give any advice on this,
but it's tricky, right?
As we were talking before we hit record,
like if you have a license in a subfolder,
Does that license override the more broad one?
Do you have to go and change your broad license,
your MIT license, say, here's the MIT license,
except for this section of the repo?
This doesn't apply to, see, it's license, you know,
that's weird.
- I presume that the big projects,
the Djangos of this world and the NumPy
must have thought about this stuff,
so probably worth doing some research on them,
but I'm thinking out loud and I probably need to come up
with a conclusive answer before I say more.
Well, it's called a plan, not a release, right?
- Yeah.
Okay, we talked about the,
the Hidante becoming its own license.
The one that I want to talk about is from,
from ORM and friends, I guess.
Yeah, maybe talk about this, these sections here.
Some of these changes.
- So there's a whole bunch of improvements here
that we could talk about for an hour,
probably on each one, let alone, let alone full,
But the from ORM was a bit of a strange case
where you had to have a config flag
and then there was a method on a model.
Pylantic Core has this built-in from attributes power
which basically allows it to recurse
through some Python object that is not a dictionary
instead of a dictionary if you switch that on.
So we talked earlier about aliases and about hunting down
through some complex objects normally of dictionaries
if that came in from JSON, but in lots of contexts,
an ORM in particular, it's not, right?
So from attributes, it lets you basically do that same
finding things in an object
from something that's not a dictionary
via basically get attr and not get item effectively.
- Yeah, yeah, and that makes a lot of sense
'cause then you could just pass any class
that you got from anywhere.
You don't have to find a way to get it to a dictionary.
- Yeah, exactly.
And Pylantic should take care of that
and give you nice warnings when at like the third level,
it gets the right error
or it gets a type error, it'll tell you type error
and if it's an attribute error, it'll say not found.
So-- - Got it.
Yeah, so from ORM, to me that felt like,
well, here's a thing, a way to integrate it
with SQLAlchemy or something like that.
But this is just more general to say,
we're moving to something that just says,
given any object, just go get it--
- I mean, from ORM was a dumb name.
You're quite right, it came exactly from
compatibility with ORMs and SQLAlchemy, but in particular.
But yeah, what we're actually doing
is taking stuff from attributes.
So the new name makes more sense
and the new functionality is like a lot more powerful.
- Would from attributes work on properties
in addition to fields?
- It should do, yeah.
Yes, it does.
There's a unit test for it, it does.
- Okay, fantastic.
That's really cool 'cause your class
might have computed elements,
but you want them to show up in your JSON, right?
Or something like that.
- Yeah. - Yeah, cool.
All right, I think that might be it.
No, one more question I have for you.
When I was doing C, C++, C#,
I remember thinking about numerical types a lot.
Is it sufficient to have an int here?
Do I need a long?
Is it an unsigned long?
How much data could it be?
What happens if I have an int and I increment it,
now it's negative 2.1 billion or whatever,
Like there's all these weird scenarios
that go away in Python because Python uses a slower
but way more flexible numerical type, right?
- Yep.
- All the stuff happening in Rust,
I feel like you might need to think about that a little bit.
- Yeah, so it's all I32 in the case of Ints,
so we're limited to whatever, so I64, sorry, I64.
So whatever the limit is on I64,
that does mean that you can't pass in,
Yeah, you had it there, whatever two to the 64 is,
there we are, that's the number.
- I don't know how to say that number,
but it's like a million trillion times nine or something.
- Yeah, you would have trouble with,
you could use a functional validator,
you could find a way around it if you had to,
but yeah, I think that's a price worth paying
for the fact that we can do integer stuff
really quickly, right?
And we can do bounds checks much more quickly.
Yeah, and we have, obviously, we have nice errors in there
if you do pass in something bigger than that,
or if you pass float inf, again, we'll get infinity,
same as we would if you got a number above that,
or float nan, again, you'll get int,
you know, that's not allowed.
So those cases are all taken care of
and they give you a nice error,
and there would be an escape hatch if you really had to.
- Right, so the escape hatch could be,
you might write a validator that checks,
is the number, in Python it checks,
is the number bigger than this limit?
If it is, raise an exception, say, number two big
or something like that.
- Yeah, I mean, there isn't actually an escape hatch
in the case of JSON, 'cause we have to do the parsing
before we get there.
So you'd have to parse your JSON externally
and then parse it in as a Python object
and do something weird, but--
- It's uncommon that you get insanely large numbers
like this.
- I think that the insanely large numbers like that
come up when people try and break things.
Almost as if they're trying to--
- Yeah, they try to break things
or they're trying to do some odd math problem
where like I'm trying to use recursion to compute
and see how many prime, something like that.
But in the general day to day of I'm accepting
like user input over an API, you know.
- What I would say is that as a Unix timestamp
in milliseconds is beyond 999 in years, right?
It's beyond the date that anyone's ever gonna wanna use.
So I don't see that being a problem really.
- Yeah, I don't either.
Actually, I think there's probably,
I don't know how to make it happen,
but there's probably some interesting performance story
for Python getting faster,
if it could work with real numerical types
rather than these super flexible numerical types.
You know, a lot of times you'll see examples of math
and it's like, well, okay, this, you know,
pi long object thing, instead of working just with,
you know, true ints and floats and stuff,
really slows it down.
So I don't know, I see a future maybe someday
where Python actually adopts
these sort of limited types like this potentially.
- But isn't that what kind of libraries like Number
are doing, they're allowing you to selectively compile
a function without going completely off on a tangent.
- Right, exactly.
There you explicitly say whether it's an int
or stuff like that, right?
I think the other option would be,
another way would be to say,
you don't wanna be writing Python at that point
'cause you want all the tools available in Rust syntax
to allow you to say all the stuff you wanna be able to say
and do integer overflow nicely.
So the other option would be,
at some point there'll be a way to basically write Rust
even more easily than now inside Python.
Those of us who are using PyCharm
and are really lucky that we get PyCharm
and we can get basically syntax highlighting
in any random string, that doesn't seem too crazy.
and obviously even more so if you were importing a file.
So I think there are lots of ways around it.
Yeah.
- Yeah, we'll see.
Maybe more stuff to come together
with the WebAssembly feature, who knows?
Anyway, a lot of stuff to think about.
I think this is, I didn't bring this up
because I feel like this is a problem or anything.
I brought it up just 'cause I wanted people to be maybe
aware that there are some slightly different
data types at play here since it's going through Rust.
- Yeah, I think it's important to see
that under the hood we are doing, yeah, yeah, exactly.
And so we didn't talk about date, time, date, time, time,
time delta validation, but I've built a library in Rust
for doing that a bit faster than all the ones I could find
that is, for me, makes the right compromise
called speed date.
And that is having to deal with
exactly those overflow problems.
And I fuzzed this library a great deal
and found a whole bunch of overflow issues by fuzzing it
because yeah, when you're doing raw parsing
in Rust, you have to think about that stuff.
Those of us who come from a Python background
haven't even thought about, you know,
the idea that adding two numbers is scary
and might result in a panic.
- Yeah, honestly, I hadn't thought about it before.
It's kind of nice to just not have to worry
about those things.
You used to just always have to consider, you know,
is it okay to add, is it okay to multiply these things?
Because even if that's just an intermediate value,
something insane might happen along the way, right?
- Yep.
- Yeah, cool.
All right, well, thank you so much
for working on Pydantic, putting it out there.
I know it's made my code and my projects much nicer.
72,000 other people agree, it seems like.
- No problem, thank you very much.
And thank you so much to all of the people
who help with Pydantic in every way,
from like Eric and Sebastian and people
who work on it quite a lot,
but also to all the people who create issues
and submit one pull request.
It makes my job a lot more fun that it's not just me
sitting in an ivory tower doing it on my own.
- Yeah, absolutely.
It's much more fun to work on projects with people.
- Absolutely.
- Magnus says, "Thanks for the great show
"and all the work on Pydantic.
"Looking forward to Pydantic 2."
Right on.
Now, before we get out of here, final two questions.
If you're gonna write some Python code, work on Pydantic,
what editor do you pull up?
- I pull up PyCharm.
I'm a complete convert.
I completely rely on it.
- Yeah.
- Right on.
And notable PyPI or even a cargo package, I suppose,
whatever you wanna shout out to some external library
out there that you think is pretty cool.
- It's not gonna be particularly interesting
because we've talked about it already,
but Py03, I'm like forever impressed
by what those guys have done.
And obviously they've made what I'm working on here possible
and they've been really helpful for me
when I've asked dumb Rust questions.
So yeah, thank you to them.
And yeah, if you're ever thinking about getting into Rust,
doing it from Python is a really neat way
where when you can't work out what the hell's going on,
you can kind of fall back to Python sometimes.
- Right on.
There's an audience question a while back
about any resources that you might recommend
for learning Rust or on the journey
to getting to Py03 and so on.
- No, I'm like, people always ask me,
how did I learn to code and where did I do it?
And I basically smash my head against the wall
until it compiled.
(laughing)
- Yeah, I hear that.
That's a pretty common way.
Okay, final call to action.
People are interested, excited, they have feedback,
something like that, they want to try out Pydantic 2.
- Particularly if you're using an unusual environment,
install Pydantic Core right now, pip install Pydantic Core,
and just run the simple example as one,
for example, on the release, check it compiles,
and if you find an environment where it doesn't work,
so it not compiles but runs, let me know,
'cause that'll be easier to fix sooner rather than later,
And then most of all, once we get to the betas
of an alphas of Pydantic V2, please come and try it then,
because again, it'll be a lot easier to fix it
before it's released than after.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- And I'll do a lot of shouting on Twitter about that
when the time comes.
- Perfect.
All right, Samuel, thank you so much for being here.
Thank you for your work on Pydantic and everything else.
Yeah, yeah, you bet.
As always, see you later.
- Cheers.
Bye-bye.